Add a guide on how to use FDS with local data (#3176)
adap/flower: datasets/doc/source/how-to-use-with-local-data.rst

Use with Local Data
===================

> You can partition data from local files and in-memory data in
> ``Flower Datasets`` library using ``Partitioner`` s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create ``Flower Datasets`` from your local files or in-memory
data structures and then partition them using a built-in ``Partitioner``.
```

Reviewer: We also show how to create the datasets, so I though of highlighting it right from the start.

Author: They can't create FederatedDatasets. And Flower Datasets is a name of the library, so I'd not use it in that context. I'll think about how to rewrite it.

Reviewer: *a HF Dataset (maybe worth highlighting that's what's under-the-hood in FlowerDatasets?)

This guide details how to load and partition your dataset created from:

* local files: CSV, JSON, image, audio data,
* in-memory data : dictionary, list, pd.DataFrame, np.ndarray.

General Overview
----------------

> FederatedDataset is an abstraction that performs all the steps to prepare the dataset for FL experiments: downloading, preprocessing (including resplitting), and partitioning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`FederatedDataset <ref-api/flwr_datasets.FederatedDataset.html>`_ is an abstraction that performs all the steps to prepare the dataset for FL experiments: downloading, preprocessing (including resplitting), and partitioning.
```

> However, the partitioning happens thanks to the ``partitioners`` of type ``str: Partitioner`` (meaning a dictionary mapping the split name of the dataset to the ``Partitioner``).

Reviewer: I'm unsure if we need this level of detail for this guide.

Author: Ok, I simplified the General Overview section.

> You can also use ``Partitioner`` s alone without relying on the FederatedDataset (skipping the data download part). A ``Partitioner`` is also not concerned if the data is downloaded from the Hugging Face Hub or created from another source (e.g., loaded locally). The only crucial point is that the dataset you assign to the ``Partitioner`` has to be of the Dataset type (datasets.Dataset).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use ``Partitioner`` s alone without relying on the ``FederatedDataset`` (skipping the data download part). A ``Partitioner`` is also not concerned if the data is downloaded from the Hugging Face Hub or created from another source (e.g., loaded locally). The only crucial point is that the dataset you assign to the ``Partitioner`` has to be of type `datasets.Dataset <https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset>`_.
```

Reviewer: One small thing, i'm not 100% happy with "``Partitioner`` s", looks strange. Maybe we can rewrite it to avoid using plural?

Author: Ok, I'll go with "You can also use any Partitioner"

    "can-have-more-splits": ...
  }
  dataset = load_dataset("csv", data_files=data_files)

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

JSON
^^^^

.. code-block:: python

  from datasets import load_dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner

  # Single file
  data_files = "path-to-my-file.json"

  # Multitple Files
  data_files = [ "path-to-my-file-1.json", "path-to-my-file-2.json", ...]
  dataset = load_dataset("json", data_files=data_files)

  # Divided Dataset
  data_files = {
    "train": single_train_file_or_list_of_files,
     "test": single_test_file_or_list_of_files,
     "can-have-more-splits": ...
  }
  dataset = load_dataset("json", data_files=data_files)

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

Image
^^^^^
You can create an image dataset in tow ways:

1) give a path the the directory

.. code-block:: python

  from datasets import load_dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner

  # Directly from a directory

>   dataset = load_dataset("imagefolder", data_dir="/path/to/folder")

Reviewer: I presume this will only work if the directory has a specific structure? Should it follow the same structure as Torchvision's [ImageFolder](https://pytorch.org/vision/main/generated/torchvision.datasets.ImageFolder.html) dataset? 

I think we can provide a brief into to each of the "tow ways" presented for Images and Audio

Reviewer: I see later you point to the HF docs that shows how to load Loca image data. Would be good to have a mini summary here. or directly point readers to that resource in this section.

Author: I'll add more details on that

Author: Example added

Use with Local Data
===================

You can partition your local files and Python objects in
``Flower Datasets`` library using any available ``Partitioner``.

This guide details how to create a `Hugging Face <https://huggingface.co/>`_ `Dataset <https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset>`_ which is the required type of input for Partitioners.
We will cover:

* local files: CSV, JSON, image, audio,
* in-memory data: dictionary, list, pd.DataFrame, np.ndarray.

General Overview
----------------
An all-in-one dataset preparation (downloading, preprocessing, partitioning) happens
using `FederatedDataset <ref-api/flwr_datasets.FederatedDataset.html>`_. However, we

> will use only the `Partitioner` here since we use already accessible data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will use only the `Partitioner` here since we use readily accessible data.
```

Reviewer: to me it sounds better like this

  data_files = [ "path-to-my-file-1.csv", "path-to-my-file-2.csv", ...]
  dataset = load_dataset("csv", data_files=data_files)

  # Divided Dataset
  data_files = {
    "train": single_train_file_or_list_of_files,
    "test": single_test_file_or_list_of_files,
    "can-have-more-splits": ...
  }
  dataset = load_dataset("csv", data_files=data_files)

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

JSON
^^^^

.. code-block:: python

  from datasets import load_dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner

  # Single file
  data_files = "path-to-my-file.json"

  # Multitple Files
  data_files = [ "path-to-my-file-1.json", "path-to-my-file-2.json", ...]
  dataset = load_dataset("json", data_files=data_files)

  # Divided Dataset
  data_files = {
    "train": single_train_file_or_list_of_files,
     "test": single_test_file_or_list_of_files,
     "can-have-more-splits": ...
  }
  dataset = load_dataset("json", data_files=data_files)

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

Image
^^^^^

> You can create an image dataset in tow ways:

Author: ```suggestion
You can create an image dataset in two ways:
```

1) give a path the directory

The directory needs to be structured in the following way: dataset-name/split/class/name. For example:

.. code-block::

  mnist/train/1/unique_name.png
  mnist/train/1/unique_name.png
  mnist/train/2/unique_name.png
  ...
  mnist/test/1/unique_name.png
  mnist/test/1/unique_name.png
  mnist/test/2/unique_name.png

Then, the path you can give is `./mnist`.

.. code-block:: python

  from datasets import load_dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner

  # Directly from a directory
  dataset = load_dataset("imagefolder", data_dir="/path/to/folder")
  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

2) create a dataset from a CSV/JSON file and cast the path column to Image.

.. code-block:: python

  from datasets import Image
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner

>   dataset = csv_data_with_path_column.cast_column("path", Image())

Reviewer 2: Am I right in understanding that there should be a `load_dataset` first? 
```diff
- from datasets import load_dataset
+ from datasets import Audio, load_dataset
```

It'd be worth adding the `load_dataset()` line so that it is clear that the custom CSV/JSON file is loaded first before running `cast_column()`. 
```diff
- dataset = csv_data_with_path_column.cast_column("path", Image())
+ dataset = load_dataset(...)
+ dataset = dataset.cast_column("path", Image())
```

Author: ```suggestion
  from datasets import Image, load_dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner

  dataset = load_dataset(...)
  dataset = dataset.cast_column("path", Image())
```

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

Audio
^^^^^
Analogously to the image datasets, there are two methods here:

> 1) give a path the the directory

Reviewer 2: ```diff
- give a path the the directory
+ give a path the directory
```

Author: ```suggestion
1) give a path to the directory
```

.. code-block:: python

  from datasets import load_dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner

  dataset = load_dataset("audiofolder", data_dir="/path/to/folder")

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

> 2) create a dataset from a CSV/JSON file and cast the path column to Image.

Reviewer 2: ```diff
- 2) create a dataset from a CSV/JSON file and cast the path column to Image.
- 2) create a dataset from a CSV/JSON file and cast the path column to Audio.
``

Author: ```suggestion
2) create a dataset from a CSV/JSON file and cast the path column to Audio.
```

.. code-block:: python

  from datasets import Audio
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner

>   dataset = csv_data_with_path_column.cast_column("path", Audio())

Reviewer 2: ```diff
- from datasets import load_dataset
+ from datasets import Audio, load_dataset
```
Adding the import here will make this example self-contained. 

Also, I think it's worth adding the `load_dataset()` line so that it is clear that the custom CSV/JSON file is loaded first before running `cast_column()`. 
```diff
- dataset = csv_data_with_path_column.cast_column("path", Audio())
+ dataset = load_dataset(...)
+ dataset = dataset.cast_column("path", Audio())
```

Author: ```suggestion
  from datasets import Audio, load_dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner

  dataset = load_dataset(...)
  dataset = dataset.cast_column("path", Audio())
```

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

In-Memory
---------

From dictionary
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. code-block:: python

>   from datasets import Dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  from datasets import Dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner
```

Reviewer: just to make them as self-contained as the csv/json/image/audio examples

  data = {"features": [1, 2, 3], "labels": [0, 0, 1]}
  dataset = Dataset.from_dict(data)

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

From list
^^^^^^^^^
.. code-block:: python

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  from datasets import Dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner
  
```

>   data = [
>     {"features": 1, "labels": 0},
>     {"features": 2, "labels": 0},
>     {"features": 3, "labels": 1}
>   ]
>   dataset = Dataset.from_dict(my_dict)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  my_list = [
    {"features": 1, "labels": 0},
    {"features": 2, "labels": 0},
    {"features": 3, "labels": 1}
  ]
  dataset = Dataset.from_list(my_list)
```

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

From pd.DataFrame
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. code-block:: python

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  from datasets import Dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner
  
```

  data = {"features": [1, 2, 3], "labels": [0, 0, 1]}
  df = pd.DataFrame(data)
  dataset = Dataset.from_pandas(df)

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

From np.ndarray
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The np.ndarray will be first transformed to pd.DataFrame

.. code-block:: python

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  from datasets import Dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner
  
```

>   data = np.array([[1, 2, 3], [0, 0, 1]).T

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  data = np.array([[1, 2, 3], [0, 0, 1]]).T
```

  # You can add the column names by passing columns=["features", "labels"]
  df = pd.DataFrame(data)
  dataset = Dataset.from_pandas(df)

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

Partitioner Details
-------------------
Partitioning is triggered automatically during the first ``load_partition`` call.
You do not need to call any “do_partitioning” method.

Partitioner abstraction is designed to allow for a single dataset assignment.

.. code-block:: python

  partitioner.dataset = your_dataset

If you need to do the same partitioning on a different dataset, create a new Partitioner
for that, e.g.:

.. code-block:: python

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import IidPartitioner

```

Use with Local Data
===================

You can partition your local files and Python objects in
``Flower Datasets`` library using any available ``Partitioner``.

This guide details how to create a `Hugging Face <https://huggingface.co/>`_ `Dataset <https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset>`_ which is the required type of input for Partitioners.
We will cover:

* local files: CSV, JSON, image, audio,
* in-memory data: dictionary, list, pd.DataFrame, np.ndarray.

General Overview
----------------
An all-in-one dataset preparation (downloading, preprocessing, partitioning) happens
using `FederatedDataset <ref-api/flwr_datasets.FederatedDataset.html>`_. However, we

> will use only the `Partitioner` here since we use already downloaded data.

Author: ```suggestion
will use only the `Partitioner` here since we use locally accessible data.
```

.. code-block:: python

  from datasets import Dataset
  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import ChosenPartitioner
  
  data = np.array([[1, 2, 3], [0, 0, 1]]).T
  # You can add the column names by passing columns=["features", "labels"]
  df = pd.DataFrame(data)
  dataset = Dataset.from_pandas(df)

  partitioner = ChosenPartitioner(...)
  partitioner.dataset = dataset
  partition = partitioner.load_partition(partition_id=0)

Partitioner Details
-------------------
Partitioning is triggered automatically during the first ``load_partition`` call.
You do not need to call any “do_partitioning” method.

Partitioner abstraction is designed to allow for a single dataset assignment.

.. code-block:: python

  partitioner.dataset = your_dataset

If you need to do the same partitioning on a different dataset, create a new Partitioner
for that, e.g.:

.. code-block:: python

  from flwr_datasets.partitioner import IidPartitioner

  iid_partitioner_for_mnist = IidPartitioner(num_partitions=10)
  iid_partitioner_for_mnist.dataset = mnist_dataset

  iid_partitioner_for_cifar = IidPartitioner(num_partitions=10)
  iid_partitioner_for_cifar.dataset = cifar_dataset

More Resources
--------------

> If you are looking for more details or you have not found the format you are looking supported, please visit the `HuggingFace Datasets docs <https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/index>`_.

Author: ```suggestion
If you are looking for more details or you have not found the format you are looking for, please visit the `HuggingFace Datasets docs <https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/index>`_.
```
